#
# This file is autogenerated by pip-compile with python 3.10
# To update, run:
#
#    pip-compile requirements.in
#
aiohttp==3.8.5
    # via
    #   aiohttp-jinja2
    #   connexion
aiohttp-jinja2==1.5
    # via connexion
aiosignal==1.2.0
    # via aiohttp
anyio==3.6.1
    # via starlette
async-timeout==4.0.2
    # via aiohttp
asyncpg==0.26.0
    # via -r requirements.in
attrs==21.4.0
    # via
    #   aiohttp
    #   hypothesis
    #   hypothesis-graphql
    #   jsonschema
    #   pytest
    #   schemathesis
certifi==2023.7.22
    # via requests
charset-normalizer==2.0.12
    # via
    #   aiohttp
    #   requests
click==8.1.3
    # via
    #   clickclick
    #   flask
    #   schemathesis
clickclick==20.10.2
    # via connexion
colorama==0.4.5
    # via schemathesis
connexion[aiohttp,swagger-ui]==2.14.0
    # via -r requirements.in
curlify==2.2.1
    # via schemathesis
flask==2.1.3
    # via connexion
frozenlist==1.3.0
    # via
    #   aiohttp
    #   aiosignal
graphql-core==3.2.1
    # via hypothesis-graphql
hypothesis==6.53.0
    # via
    #   hypothesis-graphql
    #   hypothesis-jsonschema
    #   schemathesis
hypothesis-graphql==0.9.0
    # via schemathesis
hypothesis-jsonschema==0.22.0
    # via schemathesis
idna==3.3
    # via
    #   anyio
    #   requests
    #   yarl
inflection==0.5.1
    # via connexion
iniconfig==1.1.1
    # via pytest
itsdangerous==2.1.2
    # via
    #   connexion
    #   flask
jinja2==3.1.2
    # via
    #   aiohttp-jinja2
    #   flask
    #   swagger-ui-bundle
jsonschema==4.7.2
    # via
    #   connexion
    #   hypothesis-jsonschema
    #   schemathesis
junit-xml==1.9
    # via schemathesis
markupsafe==2.1.1
    # via
    #   connexion
    #   jinja2
multidict==6.0.2
    # via
    #   aiohttp
    #   yarl
packaging==21.3
    # via
    #   connexion
    #   pytest
pluggy==1.0.0
    # via pytest
py==1.11.0
    # via pytest
pyparsing==3.0.9
    # via packaging
pyrsistent==0.18.1
    # via jsonschema
pytest==7.1.2
    # via
    #   -r requirements.in
    #   pytest-subtests
    #   schemathesis
pytest-subtests==0.7.0
    # via schemathesis
pyyaml==6.0
    # via
    #   clickclick
    #   connexion
    #   schemathesis
requests==2.27.1
    # via
    #   connexion
    #   curlify
    #   schemathesis
schemathesis==3.16.0
    # via -r requirements.in
six==1.16.0
    # via junit-xml
sniffio==1.2.0
    # via anyio
sortedcontainers==2.4.0
    # via hypothesis
starlette==0.27.0
    # via schemathesis
swagger-ui-bundle==0.0.9
    # via connexion
tomli==2.0.1
    # via
    #   pytest
    #   schemathesis
tomli-w==1.0.0
    # via schemathesis
typing-extensions==4.3.0
    # via schemathesis
urllib3==1.26.18
    # via requests
werkzeug==2.1.2
    # via
    #   connexion
    #   flask
    #   schemathesis
yarl==1.7.2
    # via
    #   aiohttp
    #   schemathesis
