docs/additional-content.rst, before:

Additional Content
==================

Papers
------

- `Deriving Semantics-Aware Fuzzers from Web API Schemas <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9793781>`_ by **@Zac-HD** and **@Stranger6667**

  - **Description**: Explores the automation of API testing through semantics-aware fuzzing. Presented at ICSE 2022.

  - **Date**: 20 Dec 2021

Articles
--------

- `Auto-Generating & Validating OpenAPI Docs in Rust: A Streamlined Approach with Utoipa and Schemathesis <https://identeco.de/en/blog/generating_and_validating_openapi_docs_in_rust/>`_ by **identeco**

  - **Description**: Demonstrates OpenAPI doc generation with Utoipa and validating it with Schemathesis.

  - **Date**: 01 Jun 2023
- `Testing APIFlask with schemathesis <http://blog.pamelafox.org/2023/02/testing-apiflask-with-schemathesis.html>`_ by **@pamelafox**

  - **Description**: Explains how to test APIFlask applications using Schemathesis.

  - **Date**: 27 Feb 2023
- `Using Hypothesis and Schemathesis to Test FastAPI <https://testdriven.io/blog/fastapi-hypothesis/>`_ by **@amalshaji**

  - **Description**: Discusses property-based testing in FastAPI with Hypothesis and Schemathesis.

  - **Date**: 06 Sep 2022
- `How to use Schemathesis to test Flask API in GitHub Actions <https://notes.lina-is-here.com/2022/08/04/schemathesis-docker-compose.html>`_ by **@lina-is-here**

  - **Description**: Guides you through setting up Schemathesis with Flask API in GitHub Actions.

  - **Date**: 04 Aug 2022
- `Using API schemas for property-based testing (RUS) <https://habr.com/ru/company/oleg-bunin/blog/576496/>`_ about Schemathesis by **@Stranger6667**

  - **Description**: Covers the usage of Schemathesis for property-based API testing.

  - **Date**: 07 Sep 2021
- `Schemathesis: property-based testing for API schemas <https://dygalo.dev/blog/schemathesis-property-based-testing-for-api-schemas/>`_ by **@Stranger6667**

  - **Description**: Introduces property-based testing for OpenAPI schemas using Schemathesis.

  - **Date**: 26 Nov 2019

Videos
------

- `Schemathesis tutorial <https://appdev.consulting.redhat.com/tracks/contract-first/automated-testing-with-schemathesis.html>`_ with an accompanying `video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4r7OC-lBKMg>`_ by **Red Hat**

  - **Description**: Provides a hands-on tutorial for API testing with Schemathesis.

  - **Date**: 09 Feb 2023
- `Effective API schemas testing <https://youtu.be/VVLZ25JgjD4>`_ from DevConf.cz by **@Stranger6667**

  - **Description**: Talks about using Schemathesis for property-based API schema testing.

  - **Date**: 24 Mar 2021
- `API-schema-based testing with schemathesis <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9FHRwrv-xuQ>`_ from EuroPython 2020 by **@hultner**

  - **Description**: Introduces property-based API testing with Schemathesis.

  - **Date**: 23 Jul 2020

Commit message:

docs: Add "API Fuzzing: What it is and why you should use it"

docs/additional-content.rst, after:

Additional Content
==================

Papers
------

- `Deriving Semantics-Aware Fuzzers from Web API Schemas <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9793781>`_ by **@Zac-HD** and **@Stranger6667**

  - **Description**: Explores the automation of API testing through semantics-aware fuzzing. Presented at ICSE 2022.

  - **Date**: 20 Dec 2021

Articles
--------

- `Auto-Generating & Validating OpenAPI Docs in Rust: A Streamlined Approach with Utoipa and Schemathesis <https://identeco.de/en/blog/generating_and_validating_openapi_docs_in_rust/>`_ by **identeco**

  - **Description**: Demonstrates OpenAPI doc generation with Utoipa and validating it with Schemathesis.

  - **Date**: 01 Jun 2023
- `Testing APIFlask with schemathesis <http://blog.pamelafox.org/2023/02/testing-apiflask-with-schemathesis.html>`_ by **@pamelafox**

  - **Description**: Explains how to test APIFlask applications using Schemathesis.

  - **Date**: 27 Feb 2023
- `Using Hypothesis and Schemathesis to Test FastAPI <https://testdriven.io/blog/fastapi-hypothesis/>`_ by **@amalshaji**

  - **Description**: Discusses property-based testing in FastAPI with Hypothesis and Schemathesis.

  - **Date**: 06 Sep 2022
- `How to use Schemathesis to test Flask API in GitHub Actions <https://notes.lina-is-here.com/2022/08/04/schemathesis-docker-compose.html>`_ by **@lina-is-here**

  - **Description**: Guides you through setting up Schemathesis with Flask API in GitHub Actions.

  - **Date**: 04 Aug 2022
- `Using API schemas for property-based testing (RUS) <https://habr.com/ru/company/oleg-bunin/blog/576496/>`_ about Schemathesis by **@Stranger6667**

  - **Description**: Covers the usage of Schemathesis for property-based API testing.

  - **Date**: 07 Sep 2021
- `Schemathesis: property-based testing for API schemas <https://dygalo.dev/blog/schemathesis-property-based-testing-for-api-schemas/>`_ by **@Stranger6667**

  - **Description**: Introduces property-based testing for OpenAPI schemas using Schemathesis.

  - **Date**: 26 Nov 2019

Videos
------

- `API Fuzzing: What it is and why you should use it <https://youtu.be/wX3GMJY9B6A>`_ by **José Haro Peralta**

  - **Description**: A comprehensive overview and demo of Schemathesis.

  - **Date**: 14 Feb 2023
- `Schemathesis tutorial <https://appdev.consulting.redhat.com/tracks/contract-first/automated-testing-with-schemathesis.html>`_ with an accompanying `video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4r7OC-lBKMg>`_ by **Red Hat**

  - **Description**: Provides a hands-on tutorial for API testing with Schemathesis.

  - **Date**: 09 Feb 2023
- `Effective API schemas testing <https://youtu.be/VVLZ25JgjD4>`_ from DevConf.cz by **@Stranger6667**

  - **Description**: Talks about using Schemathesis for property-based API schema testing.

  - **Date**: 24 Mar 2021
- `API-schema-based testing with schemathesis <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9FHRwrv-xuQ>`_ from EuroPython 2020 by **@hultner**

  - **Description**: Introduces property-based API testing with Schemathesis.

  - **Date**: 23 Jul 2020
