docs/how.rst, before:

Data generation
===============

This section describes how Schemathesis generates test examples and their serialization process.

Payload serialization
---------------------

When your API accepts a payload, requests should have a media type located in their ``Content-Type`` header.
In Open API 3.0, you may write something like this:

.. code-block::
   :emphasize-lines: 7

    openapi: 3.0.0
    paths:
      /pet:
        post:
          requestBody:
            content:
              application/json:
                schema:
                  type: object
            required: true

In this example, operation ```POST /pet`` expects ``application/json`` payload. For each defined media type Schemathesis
generates data according to the relevant schema (``{"type": "object"}`` in the example).

.. note:: This data is stored in the ``case`` fixture you use in tests when you use our ``pytest`` integration.

Before sending, this data should be serialized to the format expected by the tested operation. Schemathesis supports
most common media types like ``application/json`` and ``text/plain`` out of the box and allows you to add support for other
media types via the ``serializers`` mechanism.

Schemathesis uses ``requests`` to send API requests over network and ``werkzeug.Client`` for direct WSGI integration.
Serializers define the process of transforming generated Python objects into structures that can be sent by these tools.

If Schemathesis is unable to serialize data for a media type, the generated samples will be rejected. If you do not have
a different media type for the tested operation that Schemathesis can serialize, you will see a ``Unsatisfiable`` error.

CSV data example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In this example, we will define an operation that expects CSV data and setup a serializer for it.

Even though, Open API does not define a standard way to describe the structure of CSV payload, we can use the ``array``
type to describe it:

.. code-block::
   :emphasize-lines: 8-21

    paths:
      /csv:
        post:
          requestBody:
            content:
              text/csv:
                schema:
                  items:
                    additionalProperties: false
                    properties:
                      first_name:
                        pattern: \A[A-Za-z]*\Z
                        type: string
                      last_name:
                        pattern: \A[A-Za-z]*\Z
                        type: string
                    required:
                    - first_name
                    - last_name
                    type: object
                  type: array
            required: true
          responses:
            '200':
              description: OK

This schema describes a CSV structure with two string fields - ``first_name`` and ``last_name``. Schemathesis will
generate lists of Python dictionaries that can be serialized by ``csv.DictWriter``.

You are free to write a schema of any complexity, but be aware that Schemathesis may generate uncommon data
that your serializer will need to handle. In this example we restrict string characters only to ASCII letters
to avoid handling Unicode symbols for simplicity.

First, let's define a function that will transform lists of dictionaries to CSV strings:

.. code-block:: python

    import csv
    from io import StringIO

    def to_csv(data):
        if not data:
            # Empty CSV file
            return ""
        output = StringIO()
        # Assume all items have the same fields
        field_names = sorted(data[0].keys())
        writer = csv.DictWriter(output, field_names)
        writer.writeheader()
        writer.writerows(data)
        return output.getvalue()

.. note::

    You can take a look at the official `csv module documentation <https://docs.python.org/3/library/csv.html>`_ for more examples of CSV serialization.

Second, register a serializer class via the ``schemathesis.serializers.register`` decorator:

.. code-block:: python
   :emphasize-lines: 3

    import schemathesis

    @schemathesis.serializers.register("text/csv")
    class CSVSerializer:
        ...

This decorator requires the name of the media type you need to handle and optionally accepts additional media types via its ``aliases`` keyword argument.

Third, the serializer should have two methods - ``as_requests`` and ``as_werkzeug``.

.. code-block:: python

    ...
    class CSVSerializer:

        def as_requests(self, context, value):
            return {"data": to_csv(value)}

        def as_werkzeug(self, context, value):
            return {"data": to_csv(value)}

They should return dictionaries of keyword arguments that will be passed to ``requests.request`` and ``werkzeug.Client.open``, respectively.
With the CSV example, we create payload with the ``to_csv`` function defined earlier and return it as ``data``, which is valid for both cases.

Additionally, you have ``context`` where you can access the current test case via ``context.case``.

.. important::

    Please, note that ``value`` will match your schema in positive testing scenarios, and it is your responsibility
    to handle errors during data serialization.

Commit message:

fix: Distinguishing between no payload requests & `null` payload (#929)
Ref: #916 #919

docs/how.rst, after:

Data generation
===============

This section describes how Schemathesis generates test examples and their serialization process.

Payload serialization
---------------------

When your API accepts a payload, requests should have a media type located in their ``Content-Type`` header.
In Open API 3.0, you may write something like this:

.. code-block::
   :emphasize-lines: 7

    openapi: 3.0.0
    paths:
      /pet:
        post:
          requestBody:
            content:
              application/json:
                schema:
                  type: object
            required: true

In this example, operation ```POST /pet`` expects ``application/json`` payload. For each defined media type Schemathesis
generates data according to the relevant schema (``{"type": "object"}`` in the example).

.. note:: This data is stored in the ``case`` fixture you use in tests when you use our ``pytest`` integration.

Before sending, this data should be serialized to the format expected by the tested operation. Schemathesis supports
most common media types like ``application/json`` and ``text/plain`` out of the box and allows you to add support for other
media types via the ``serializers`` mechanism.

Schemathesis uses ``requests`` to send API requests over network and ``werkzeug.Client`` for direct WSGI integration.
Serializers define the process of transforming generated Python objects into structures that can be sent by these tools.

If Schemathesis is unable to serialize data for a media type, the generated samples will be rejected. If you do not have
a different media type for the tested operation that Schemathesis can serialize, you will see a ``Unsatisfiable`` error.

If the operation under tests considers payload to be optional, these cases are still generated by Schemathesis, but
not passed to serializers.

CSV data example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In this example, we will define an operation that expects CSV data and setup a serializer for it.

Even though, Open API does not define a standard way to describe the structure of CSV payload, we can use the ``array``
type to describe it:

.. code-block::
   :emphasize-lines: 8-21

    paths:
      /csv:
        post:
          requestBody:
            content:
              text/csv:
                schema:
                  items:
                    additionalProperties: false
                    properties:
                      first_name:
                        pattern: \A[A-Za-z]*\Z
                        type: string
                      last_name:
                        pattern: \A[A-Za-z]*\Z
                        type: string
                    required:
                    - first_name
                    - last_name
                    type: object
                  type: array
            required: true
          responses:
            '200':
              description: OK

This schema describes a CSV structure with two string fields - ``first_name`` and ``last_name``. Schemathesis will
generate lists of Python dictionaries that can be serialized by ``csv.DictWriter``.

You are free to write a schema of any complexity, but be aware that Schemathesis may generate uncommon data
that your serializer will need to handle. In this example we restrict string characters only to ASCII letters
to avoid handling Unicode symbols for simplicity.

First, let's define a function that will transform lists of dictionaries to CSV strings:

.. code-block:: python

    import csv
    from io import StringIO

    def to_csv(data):
        if not data:
            # Empty CSV file
            return ""
        output = StringIO()
        # Assume all items have the same fields
        field_names = sorted(data[0].keys())
        writer = csv.DictWriter(output, field_names)
        writer.writeheader()
        writer.writerows(data)
        return output.getvalue()

.. note::

    You can take a look at the official `csv module documentation <https://docs.python.org/3/library/csv.html>`_ for more examples of CSV serialization.

Second, register a serializer class via the ``schemathesis.serializers.register`` decorator:

.. code-block:: python
   :emphasize-lines: 3

    import schemathesis

    @schemathesis.serializers.register("text/csv")
    class CSVSerializer:
        ...

This decorator requires the name of the media type you need to handle and optionally accepts additional media types via its ``aliases`` keyword argument.

Third, the serializer should have two methods - ``as_requests`` and ``as_werkzeug``.

.. code-block:: python

    ...
    class CSVSerializer:

        def as_requests(self, context, value):
            return {"data": to_csv(value)}

        def as_werkzeug(self, context, value):
            return {"data": to_csv(value)}

They should return dictionaries of keyword arguments that will be passed to ``requests.request`` and ``werkzeug.Client.open``, respectively.
With the CSV example, we create payload with the ``to_csv`` function defined earlier and return it as ``data``, which is valid for both cases.

Additionally, you have ``context`` where you can access the current test case via ``context.case``.

.. important::

    Please, note that ``value`` will match your schema in positive testing scenarios, and it is your responsibility
    to handle errors during data serialization.
