docs/recipes.rst, before:

Recipes
=======

Disabling TLS certificate verification
--------------------------------------

Sometimes, during testing, it is needed to disable TLS verification of the service under test.

**CLI**

.. code-block:: text

    schemathesis run http://localhost/schema.json --request-tls-verify

**Python**

.. code-block:: python

    import schemathesis

    schema = schemathesis.from_uri("http://localhost/schema.json")


    @schema.parametrize()
    def test_api(case):
        # If you need `response`
        response = case.call(verify=False)
        # Alternatively if you don't need `response`
        case.call_and_validate(verify=False)

Authentication
--------------

Most of the APIs are not public and require some form of authentication.

**CLI**

Schemathesis CLI accepts ``--auth`` option for Basic Auth:

.. code:: text

    schemathesis run --auth username:$PASSWORD ...

Alternatively, use ``--header`` to set the ``Authorization`` header directly:

.. code:: text

    schemathesis run -H "Authorization: Bearer TOKEN" ...


It is possible to specify more custom headers to be sent with each request. Each header value should be in the ``KEY: VALUE`` format.
You can also provide multiple headers by using the ``-H`` option multiple times:

.. code:: text

    schemathesis run -H "Authorization: ..." -H "X-API-Key: ..."

**Python**

``case.call`` and ``case.call_and_validate`` proxy custom keyword arguments to ``requests.Session.request``. Therefore, you can use ``auth``:

.. code-block:: python

    import schemathesis

    SCHEMA_URL = "http://localhost/schema.json"

    schema = schemathesis.from_uri(SCHEMA_URL)


    @schema.parametrize()
    def test_api(case):
        # If you need `response`
        response = case.call(auth=("user", "password"))
        # Alternatively if you don't need `response`
        case.call_and_validate(auth=("user", "password"))

Token-based authentication via a separate ``pytest`` fixture:

.. code-block:: python

    import pytest
    import schemathesis

    SCHEMA_URL = "http://localhost/schema.json"
    LOGIN_ENDPOINT = "http://localhost/api/login/"

    schema = schemathesis.from_uri(SCHEMA_URL)


    @pytest.fixture
    def token():
        # Make a login request
        response = requests.post(
            LOGIN_ENDPOINT, json={"login": "test", "password": "password"}
        )
        # Parse the response and extract token
        return response.json()["auth_token"]


    @schema.parametrize()
    def test_api(case, token):
        # `headers` may be `None`, depending on your schema
        case.headers = case.headers or {}
        case.headers["Authorization"] = f"Bearer {token}"
        # Run the usual testing code below
        case.call_and_validate()

Using an HTTP(S) proxy
----------------------

Sometimes you need to send your traffic to some other tools. You could set up a proxy via the following env variables:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ export HTTP_PROXY="http://10.10.1.10:3128"
    $ export HTTPS_PROXY="http://10.10.1.10:1080"
    $ schemathesis run http://localhost/schema.json

Per-route request timeouts
--------------------------

Different API operations may need different timeouts during testing. You could achieve it this way:

.. code-block:: python

    import schemathesis

    DEFAULT_TIMEOUT = 10  # in seconds
    SCHEMA_URL = "http://localhost/schema.json"
    schema = schemathesis.from_uri(SCHEMA_URL)


    @schema.parametrize()
    def test_api(case):
        key = (
            case.operation.method.upper(),
            case.operation.path,
        )
        timeout = {
            ("GET", "/users"): 5,
            # and so on
        }.get(key, DEFAULT_TIMEOUT)
        case.call_and_validate(timeout=timeout)

In the example above, the default timeout is 10 seconds, but for `GET /users` it will be 5 seconds.

Commit message:

feat: add request-cert and request-cert-key arguments

docs/recipes.rst, after:

Recipes
=======

Disabling TLS certificate verification
--------------------------------------

Sometimes, during testing, it is needed to disable TLS verification of the service under test.

**CLI**

.. code-block:: text

    schemathesis run http://localhost/schema.json --request-tls-verify

**Python**

.. code-block:: python

    import schemathesis

    schema = schemathesis.from_uri("http://localhost/schema.json")


    @schema.parametrize()
    def test_api(case):
        # If you need `response`
        response = case.call(verify=False)
        # Alternatively if you don't need `response`
        case.call_and_validate(verify=False)

Authentication
--------------

Most of the APIs are not public and require some form of authentication.

**CLI**

Schemathesis CLI accepts ``--auth`` option for Basic Auth:

.. code:: text

    schemathesis run --auth username:$PASSWORD ...

Alternatively, use ``--header`` to set the ``Authorization`` header directly:

.. code:: text

    schemathesis run -H "Authorization: Bearer TOKEN" ...


It is possible to specify more custom headers to be sent with each request. Each header value should be in the ``KEY: VALUE`` format.
You can also provide multiple headers by using the ``-H`` option multiple times:

.. code:: text

    schemathesis run -H "Authorization: ..." -H "X-API-Key: ..."


It is possible to authenticate with an unencrypted certificate (e.g. PEM) by using the ``--request-cert /file/path/example.pem`` argument.

.. code-block:: text

    schemathesis run --base-url https://example.com --request-tls-verify=no --request-cert client.pem /app/open-api.yaml


It is also possible to provide the certificate and the private key separately with the usage of the ``--request-cert-key /file/path/example.key`` argument.

.. code-block:: text

    schemathesis run --base-url https://example.com --request-tls-verify=no --request-cert client.crt --request-cert-key client.key /app/open-api.yaml


**Python**

``case.call`` and ``case.call_and_validate`` proxy custom keyword arguments to ``requests.Session.request``. Therefore, you can use ``auth``:

.. code-block:: python

    import schemathesis

    SCHEMA_URL = "http://localhost/schema.json"

    schema = schemathesis.from_uri(SCHEMA_URL)


    @schema.parametrize()
    def test_api(case):
        # If you need `response`
        response = case.call(auth=("user", "password"))
        # Alternatively if you don't need `response`
        case.call_and_validate(auth=("user", "password"))

Token-based authentication via a separate ``pytest`` fixture:

.. code-block:: python

    import pytest
    import schemathesis

    SCHEMA_URL = "http://localhost/schema.json"
    LOGIN_ENDPOINT = "http://localhost/api/login/"

    schema = schemathesis.from_uri(SCHEMA_URL)


    @pytest.fixture
    def token():
        # Make a login request
        response = requests.post(
            LOGIN_ENDPOINT, json={"login": "test", "password": "password"}
        )
        # Parse the response and extract token
        return response.json()["auth_token"]


    @schema.parametrize()
    def test_api(case, token):
        # `headers` may be `None`, depending on your schema
        case.headers = case.headers or {}
        case.headers["Authorization"] = f"Bearer {token}"
        # Run the usual testing code below
        case.call_and_validate()

Using an HTTP(S) proxy
----------------------

Sometimes you need to send your traffic to some other tools. You could set up a proxy via the following env variables:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ export HTTP_PROXY="http://10.10.1.10:3128"
    $ export HTTPS_PROXY="http://10.10.1.10:1080"
    $ schemathesis run http://localhost/schema.json

Per-route request timeouts
--------------------------

Different API operations may need different timeouts during testing. You could achieve it this way:

.. code-block:: python

    import schemathesis

    DEFAULT_TIMEOUT = 10  # in seconds
    SCHEMA_URL = "http://localhost/schema.json"
    schema = schemathesis.from_uri(SCHEMA_URL)


    @schema.parametrize()
    def test_api(case):
        key = (
            case.operation.method.upper(),
            case.operation.path,
        )
        timeout = {
            ("GET", "/users"): 5,
            # and so on
        }.get(key, DEFAULT_TIMEOUT)
        case.call_and_validate(timeout=timeout)

In the example above, the default timeout is 10 seconds, but for `GET /users` it will be 5 seconds.
